Computer Generations
“Generation” in computer talk provides a framework for the growth of 
computer industry based on the technologies developed. Originally, it was 
used to distinguish between hardware technologies but was later 
extended to include both hardware and software technologies.
Computers are divided in five generations as follow: -
First generation (1942-1955) -
The early computers and others of the time were manufactured using 
vacuum tubes as electronic switching device. A vacuum tube was a 
fragile glass device using filaments as a source of electronics and could 
control and amplify electronics signals. It was the only high-speed 
electronic switching device available in those days. These vacuum tube 
computers could perform computations in milliseconds were known as 
first-generation computers.
Most of the first generation computers worked on the principle of 
storing program instructions along with data in memory of computer 
(stored program concept) so that they could automatically execute a 
program without human intervention. Memory of these computer used 
electromagnetic relays, and users fed all the data and instructions into 
the system using punched cards. Programmers wrote instructions in 
machine and assembly languages because of lack of high-level 
programming languages in those days. Since machine and assembly 
languages are difficult to work with, only a few specialists understood 
how to program these early computers.
Characteristics features of first-generation computers are as follows:
1.	They were the fastest calculating devices of their time.
2.	They were too bulky in size, requiring large rooms for installation.
3.	They used thousands of vacuum tubes that emitted large amount 
of heat and burnt out frequently. Hence the rooms/areas in which 
these computers were located had to be properly air-conditioned.
4.	Each vacuum tube consumed about a watt of power. Since a 
computer used more a ten thousand vacuum tubes, power 
consumption of these computers was very high.
5.	As vacuum tubes used filaments, they had a limited life. Because a 
computer used thousands of vacuum tubes, these computers 
were prone to frequent hardware failures.
6.	Due to low mean time between failures, these computers required 
constant maintenance.
7.	In these computers, thousands of individual components were 
assembled manually by hand into electric circuits. Hence, 
commercial production of these computers was difficult and 
costly.
8.	Since these computers were difficult to program and use, they 
had a limited commercial use.
Second Generation (1955-1964)
John Bardeen, William Shockley and Walter Brattain invented a new 
electronic switching device called transistor at Bell Laboratories in 1947. 
Transistors soon proved to be a better electronic switching device than 
vacuum tubes.
Second generation computers were manufactured using transistors. 
They were more powerful, more reliable, less expensive, smaller and 
cooler to operate than the first-generation computers.
The second generation also experienced a change in storage technology. 
Memory of second-generation computers was composed of magnetic 
cores. Magnetic cores are small rigs made of ferrite that can be 
magnetized in either clockwise or anti-clockwise direction. Large 
random access memory (having storage capacity of few tens of 
kilobytes) had several magnetic cores on a mesh of wires.
In 1957, researchers introduced magnetic tape as a faster and more 
convenient secondary storage medium. Later magnetic disk storage was 
also developed and magnetic disk and magnetic tape were main 
secondary storage media used in second generation computers. Users 
still used punched cards widely for preparing and feeding programs and 
data to a computer.
On software front, high-level programming languages (like FORTRAN, 
COBOL, ALGOL and SNOBOL.) and batch operating system emerged 
during second generation. High-level programming languages made second-
generation computers easier to program and use than first-generation 
computer. Introduction of batch operating system helped in reducing 
human intervention while processing, multiple jobs resulting in faster 
processing, enhanced throughout and easier operation of second-
generation computers.
Characteristic features of second-generation computers are as follow:
1.	They were more than ten times faster than the first-generation 
computers.
2.	They were smaller than first-generation computers and required 
smaller space.
3.	They consumed less power and dissipated less heat than the first-
generation computers. The rooms/areas in which the second-
generation computers were located still required air-conditioned.
4.	They were more reliable and less prone to hardware failures than 
the first-generation computers.
5.	They had faster and larger primary and secondary storage as 
compared to first-generation computers.
6.	They were easier to program and use than the first-generation 
computers. Hence, they had wider commercial use.
7.	In these computers, thousands of individual transistors had to be 
assembled manually by hand into electronic circuits making 
commercial production of these computers difficult and costly.
Third Generation (1964-1975)
In 1958, Jack St. Clair Kilby and Robert Noyce invented the first 
integrated circuits (called ICs) are circuits consisting of several 
electronic components like transistors, resistors and capacitors grown 
on a single chip of silicon eliminating wired interconnection between 
components. IC technology was also known as “microelectronics” 
technology.
On software front, standardization of high-level programming languages, 
timesharing operating systems, unbundling of software from hardware 
and creation of an independent software industry happened during third 
generation. FORTRAN and COBOL were the most popular programming 
languages in those days. American National Standards Institute (ANSI) 
standardized them in 1966 and 1968 respectively and the standardized 
versions were called ANSI FORTRAN and ANSI COBOL. The idea was 
that as long as a programmer follows those standards in program 
writing, he/she could run his/her program on any computer with an ANSI 
FORTRAN or ANSI COBOL compiler. Some more high-level programming 
languages were introduced during the third-generation period. Notable 
among these were PL/1, PASCAL and BASIC.
Characteristic features of third-generation computer are as follow: 
1.	They were more powerful than second-generation computers. 
They were capable of performing about 1 million instructions per 
second.
2.	They were smaller than second-generation computers requiring 
smaller space.
3.	They consumed less power and dissipated less heat than second-
generation computers.
4.	They were more reliable and less prone to hardware failures than 
second-generation computers requiring lower maintenance cost.
5.	They had faster and larger primary and secondary storage as 
compared to second-generation computers.
6.	They were general-purpose machines suitable for both scientific 
and commercial applications.
7.	Standardization of high-level programming languages allowed 
programs to be written for one computer to be easily ported to 
and executed on another computer.
8.	Timesharing operating system allowed interactive usage and 
simultaneous use of these systems by multiple users.
9.	Timesharing operating system helped in drastically improving the 
productivity of programmers cutting down the time and cost of 
program development by several fold.
10.	Minicomputers of third-generation made computers affordable 
even by smaller companies.
Fourth Generation (1975-1989)
Average number of electronic components packed on a silicon chip 
doubled each year after 1965, which lead to creation of 
microprocessor.
By 1978, Apple II from Apple Computer Inc. and the TRS-80 model from 
the Radio Shack Division of Tandy Corporation were dominant personal 
computers. By 1980, IBM realized that the personal computer market 
was too promising to ignore and came out with its own PC in 1981, 
popularly known as IBM PC. Several other manufacturers used IBM’s 
specification and designed their own PCs, popularly known as IBM 
compatible PCs or clones. The IBM PC and its clones became a popular 
standard for the PC industry during the fourth generation.
Characteristic features of fourth-generation computers are as follow:
1.	PCs were smaller and cheaper than mainframe or mainframes or 
minicomputers of third generation.
2.	Although the fourth-generation mainframes and supercomputers 
required proper air-conditioning of the rooms/areas in which they 
were located, no air air-conditioning was required for PCs.
3.	They consumed less power than third-generation computers.
4.	They were more reliable and less prone to hardware failures than 
third-generation computers requiring negligible maintenance cost.
5.	They had faster and larger primary and secondary storage as 
compared to third-generation computers.
6.	They were general-purpose machines.
7.	Use of standard high-level programming languages allowed 
programs written for one computer to be easily ported to and 
executed on another computer.
8.	Graphical user interface (GUI) enabled new users to quickly learn 
how to use computers.
9.	PC-based applications made PCs a powerful tool for both office 
and home usage.
10.	In addition to unbundled software, these systems also used add-on 
hardware feature that allowed users to invest only in the 
hardware configuration and software of their need and value.
11.	PCs of fourth generation made computers affordable even by 
individuals for their personal use at home.
Fifth Generation (1989-Present)
The trend of further miniaturization of electronic components, 
dramatic increase in power of microprocessor chips and increase in 
capacity of main memory and hard disk continued during fifth 
generation. VLSI technology became ULSI technology in fifth generation 
resulting in production of microprocessor chips having ten million 
electric components. In fact, the speed of microprocessors and the 
size of main memory and hard disk doubled almost every eighteen 
months. As a result, many features found in the CPUs of large 
mainframe systems of third and fourth generation systems became 
part of microprocessor architecture in fifth generation. This ultimately 
resulted in availability of very powerful and compact computers 
becoming available at cheaper rates and death of traditional large 
mainframe systems.
Storage technology also advanced making larger main memory and disk 
storage available in newly introduced systems. Currently, PCs having 4 
or mare Gigabytes of main memory and 1 Terabytes and more of hard 
disk capacity are common. RAID (Redundant Array of Inexpensive Disks) 
technology enables configuration of a bunch of disks as a single large 
disk. It, thus, supports larger disk space with better in-built reliability. 
Optical Disks (popularly known as Compact Disks or CDs) emerged as a 
popular portable mass storage media.
The Internet emerged with associated technologies and applications. It 
made it possible for computer users sitting access the globe to 
communicate with each other within minutes by use of electronic mail 
(known as e-mail) facility. A vast ocean of information became readily 
available to computer users through the World Wide Web (known as 
WWW). Moreover, several new types of exciting applications like 
electronic commerce, virtual libraries, virtual classrooms, distance 
education, etc. emerged during the period.
In area of programming languages, concepts that gained popularity 
during fifth-generation are JAVA programming language and parallel 
programming libraries like MPI (Message Passing Interface) and PVM 
(Parallel Virtual Machine). JAVA is used primarily on World Wide Web. It 
supports Java-based applets allowing web pages to have dynamic 
information and more interactivity with the users of web information. 
MPI and PVM libraries enable development of standardized parallel 
programs, so that a programmer can easily port and execute a parallel 
program developed for one parallel computer on other parallel 
computers. MSI is used for distributed memory parallel computers and 
PVM is used for shared memory parallel computers.
Characteristic features of fifth-generation computers are as follow:
1.	Portable PCs (called notebook computers) are much smaller and 
handy than PCs of fourth generation allowing users to use 
computing facility even while travelling.
2.	Fifth-generation desktop PCs and workstations are several times 
more powerful than PCs of fourth generation.
3.	Although fifth-generation mainframes and supercomputers require 
proper air-conditioning is normally required for notebook 
computers, desktop PCs and workstations.
4.	They consume less power than their predecessors do.
5.	They are more reliable and less prone to hardware failures than 
their predecessors were, requiring negligible maintenance cost.
6.	Many of the large-scale fifth-generation systems have hot-plug 
feature that enables failed component to be replaced with a new 
one without the need to shut down the system. Hence, the uptime 
of these systems is very high.
7.	They have faster and larger primary and secondary storage as 
compared to their predecessors.
8.	They are general-purpose machines.
9.	Use of standard high-level programming languages allows programs 
written for one computer to be easily ported to and executed on 
another computer.
10.	More user-friendly interfaces with multimedia features make the 
systems easier to learn and use by anyone, including children.
11.	Newer and more powerful applications, including multimedia 
applications, make the system more useful in every occupation.
12.	Explosion in size of internet coupled with Internet-based tools and 
applications have made these systems influence the life of even 
common people.
13.	These systems also use the concept of unbundled software add-
on hardware allowing the users to invest only in the hardware 
configuration and software of their need and value.
14.	With so many types of computers in all price ranges today, we 
have a computer for almost any type of user whether the user 
is a child or a world-fame scientist.








Some representative systems of each generation
 


1



